# HOLiFOOD: Holistic approach for tackling food systems risks in a changing global environment
The overall objective of HOLiFOOD is to improve the integrated food safety risk analysis (RA) framework in Europe to: i) meet future challenges arising from Green Deal policy driven transitions in particular in relation to climate driven changes, ii) contribute to the UN's Sustainable Development Goals and iii) support the realization of a truly secure and sustainable food production. 

HOLiFOOD will apply a system approach, which take the whole environment into account in which food is being produced, including economic, environmental and social aspects. Three supply chains will be considered (i.e. cereals [maize], legumes [lentils] and poultry [chicken]). Artificial Intelligence (AI) and big data technologies will be used in the development of early warning and emerging risks prediction systems for known and unknown food safety hazards. In addition, tools, methods and approaches will be developed for hazard detection and will be targeted and non-targeted and new holistic risk assessment methods will be develop in which food safety risk will be embedded in a comprehensive cost-benefit analysis of the food system including positive and negative health, environment and economic dimensions. An effective impact pathway will be developed and implemented through integration of the HOLiFOOD outputs into the legal framework associated with the food risk analysis process. The impact pathway will be supported by an electronic data and knowledge sharing platform aiming at the full digitalization of food (safety) systems and supporting transparency and impact for all stakeholders. In order to align with stakeholder priorities, preferences and user requirements, the HOLiFOOD innovations will be designed and tested in a multi actor approach (i.e. Living Lab) involving all stakeholders (e.g., authorities, food producers and citizens).

## Holistic approach
Emerging consumer practices, transition to sustainable food systems, climate change effects, agri-food innovation and population growth are all drivers that require holistic risk assessment to foster solutions that maximise co-benefits for environment, health, society and economy. In the context of food systems, a driver is an “issue shaping the development of a society, organisation, industry, research area, technology, etc.”, which can be classified into social, technological, economic, environmental and technological (STEEP) categories. They may act as modifiers of effect on the onset of emerging risks, namely they can either amplify or attenuate.
A system approach using Artificial Intelligence connecting all factors impacting food safety along the whole supply chain will be developed to predict known and new food safety hazards and risks (biological and chemical) to occur at any place in the supply chain allowing timely mitigation actions. 

## Specific objectives
**1. Early Warning and Emerging Risk Prediction.** To apply Big Data technologies and Artificial Intelligence (AI) for the development of methods and tools to identify and monitor existing and emerging food safety risks (ERI) that will anticipate on the drivers of change due to a changing global environment and which will support risk managers to take timely mitigating measures.

**2. Targeted and non-targeted detection of existing and emerging hazards.** To develop and validate methods and devices for the identification and characterization of existing and (re-)emerging hazards (chemical and biological [bacteria and viruses]) with the aim of anticipating and possibly mitigating/preventing impacts (preparedness).

**3. Holistic risk assessment for regulation.** To develop holistic risk assessment methods and tools to support regulation in a changing global environment. Food safety risk will be embedded in a comprehensive cost-benefit analysis of the food system including positive and negative health, environment and economic dimensions.

**4. Data and knowledge sharing infrastructures.** To design and develop an Integrated European Data and Knowledge Exchange Infrastructure that will be able to power an ecosystem of decision support systems for the identification, assessment and mitigation of (emerging) food safety issues. To integrate the HOLiFOOD infrastructure with software systems that already support food risk mitigation decisions for the multiple actors that the project engages with, demonstrating its value through pilot trials with real users.

**5. Codesign and citizen science.** To ensure that all stakeholders benefit from improved food safety, including consumers in vulnerable groups, small businesses and cooperatives within local supply chains, and to integrate knowledge exchange through all activities.

 ## Implementation - Open source code
Code that has been developed for HOLiFOOD will be made public in this repostiory, which will be updated while the project is running. More information on the code will follow soon.
