This folder contains the prediction models created for HOLiFOOD.

Models were developed to predict pesticide residue levels in the supply chains of maize, chicken, and lentils. The model input included a combination of categorical and numerical variables. Contamination level was used as model output, indicating whether the pesticide residue levels exceeded the limit of quantification as a binary variable. Separate models were constructed for each supply chain, utilizing monitoring data sourced from different repositories. The maize supply chain model utilized data from KAP, while data from AGROKNOW was utilized for the chicken and lentils supply chain models. As a data preprocessing step, the categorical variables were encoded using one-hot encoding. This is a step to translate the categorical variables into a numerical encoding, which is needed because many machine learning algorithms can't handle categorical input. 

Several machine learning algorithms were implemented to make pesticide residual predictions, namely Random Forest, XGBoost, CatBoost and Support Vector Machine. These models were selected for their historic success in classification problems with structured data. The dataset was randomly split into 80% for the training set and 20% for the test set to train and evaluate the models' performance, respectively. External validation using a different year than present in the training data to show the model's generalizability was not yet performed. In future steps, external validation will be applied for the final model performance evaluation. During training, the algorithms were trained using a class weighted approach where data from the minority class was weighed more than data from the majority class when there was a big class imbalance (maize and lentils). This technique ensures that the algorithms don't develop a bias for the majority class. The model performance is measured using the number of true negatives, false negatives, true positives, false positives and the overall accuracy of the model. The accuracy of the model is calculated by summing the number of true negatives and true positives and dividing it by the total number of predictions.

The results were displayed to each supply chain model. It is important to note that no external validation was performed due to the limitation of the available data. Consequently, this model represents a preliminary version and is subject to several limitations. As more data becomes available, the model will be updated and refined.

The current model is the first version, and there are inherent limitations in the model, code, and related results that will be addressed in future iterations.  Continuous updates and enhancements will ensure that the model becomes more robust and reliable over time.
